---
date: 2017-12-28
title: "Updating to Entity Framework 6"
template: post
slug: updating-to-entity-framework-6
categories:
  - Databases
tags:
  - sql
  - entity-framework
---

I was working on updating Entity framework from version 4 to version 6 in a project with large code base. The solution had multiple projects referring to the old assemblies that Microsoft does not recommend using with EF6. If you have not yet, read the migration guide first Upgrading to Entity Framework 6.

The thing is that previously Entity framework code was split between core libraries like `System.Data.Entity.dll` and `EntityFramework.dll` but in EF6, they have incorporated the `System.Data.Entity.dll` code in to the EF6 libraries itself. That means we do not have to refer to `System.Data.Entity.dll` anymore.

So I followed the migration guide and couple of WTF moments later. I managed to upgrade to EF6 DbContext API. But there was a gotcha in it that I did not realize at that time. A Common project in the solution which contained all the models regarding the Data Access Layer was still referring to System.Data.Entity.dll and one file in the project was making use of SqlFunctions class which exists in System.Data.Objects.SqlClient namespace to call the SoundCode method which is equivalent to `SOUNDEX` in SQL server.

```csharp
SqlFunctions.SoundCode(string arg)
```

Methods in SqlFunctions class can only be called from LINQ to Entities queries and my code was doing just that but EF6 still complained about that saying `LINQ to entities does not recognize the method Soundcode`.

The solution was to replace the `System.Data.Entity.dll` with `EntityFramework.SqlServer.dll` which also have the same functions as Microsoft has merged them in EF itself. So you can find SqlFunctions class in `System.Data.Entity.SqlServer` and that’s it. After the new reference, EF6 will recognize SqlFunctions methods in LINQ to entities queries.

**Lesson learnt**: Don’t forget to remove System.Data.Entity.dll from all projects in the solution while upgrading to EF6.
