---
date: 2018-11-30
title: "Javascript Types"
template: post
slug: javascript-types
categories:
  - JavaScript
tags:
  - javascript
---

JavaScript is a dynamically typed language and you can assign a variable different kinds of values. However, JavaScript has two main categories of types

1. Primitive Types
1. Object Types

### Primitive Types

#### Numbers

JavaScript has only one type of numbers and that is `float`, even if the written number is integral literal i.e., no decimal point, it gets stored as a floating point number.

Examples:

```javascript
123
32.11, -98
0x5e
54e8
```

#### Strings

Strings are immutable sequence of characters. It can be defined using single and double quotes. A backslash `\` is used as an escape character and only a single backslash can be used to write a string in multiple lines in source code.

Examples:

```javascript
"hello world"
"this string is single quote"
'this string is \'unique\''
"this string is writted on \
multiple lines"
```

Strings can be concatenated by using the `+` symbol. Since ES2015, templated strings can also be created inside ticks, that can use C# style format strings by using the dollar sign.

```javascript
let name = "saad"
let ticked = `this string is created by ${name}`
```

#### Boolean

`true` and `false` are two reserved words for JavaScript booleans. However, there are some values that can be considered as truthy and falsy values. For example

```javascript
0, -0
NaN
undefined
null, ""
```

are all falsy values. Rest of all are considered as truthy values. Truthy and falsy values can be used in control statements such as `if` or `while` etc.

#### Null

`null` is a special value which means there is no value at all.

#### Undefined

`undefined` means that the variable is not initialized or the value is absent. Whenever a variable is not set or initialized, its value will be undefined.

There are important differences in null and undefined types, that are discussed [in my another post](../javascript-null-vs-undefined).

#### Object Types

Functions, arrays and objects are all object types. Basically anything that is not primitive type is an object type. Objects can have properties and methods that can be defined by user.
