---
date: 2018-04-28
title: "Runtime Assembly Bindings"
template: post
slug: runtime-assembly-bindings
categories:
  - Gotchas
tags:
  - .netcore
  - assembly bindings
  - runtime
---

When we compile an app, it stores all its dependent assemblies references statically so that it could load the exact assembly which was used when the code was complied. However, sometimes we need to load a different assembly version with the already compiled app. Fortunately, .Net framework provides ways to achieve this through run time assembly binding redirects. We can achieve this through specifying publisher policies with assemblies, through updating application configuration file or by updating machine configuration file. In this article, we will see how we can achieve assembly redirect using application configuration file.

### Using App Configuration File

Using your `app.config` or `web.config` file we can specify which assemblies should our app use during the runtime. We define this using the configuration elements with the below hierarchy

```xml
<configuration>
 <runtime>
  <assemblyBinding xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1">
   <dependentAssembly>
    <assemblyIdentity name="firstAssembly"
    publicKeyToken="32ab4ba45e0a69a1"
    culture="en-us" />
    <bindingRedirect oldVersion="1.0.0.0-2.0.0.0" newVersion="3.0.0.0" />
    </dependentAssembly>
    <dependentAssembly>
    <assemblyIdentity name="secondAssembly"
    publicKeyToken="32ab4ba45e0a69a1"
    culture="en-us" />
    <bindingRedirect oldVersion="1.0.0.0" newVersion="2.0.0.0" />
    </dependentAssembly>
    <dependentAssembly>
    <assemblyIdentity name="thirdAssembly"
    publicKeyToken="32ab4ba45e0a69a1"
    culture="en-us" />
    <publisherPolicy apply="no" />
   </dependentAssembly>
  </assemblyBinding>
 </runtime>
</configuration>
```

The Assembly Identity element is used to specify the assembly name, public key token and culture etc. The Binding Redirect element specifies the actual assembly version numbers that needs redirect. Old version attribute also accepts the range e.g. `1.0.0.0-2.0.0.0` and new version attribute specifies a single version where the old version(s) will redirect.

We can also use `appliesTo` attribute in the Assembly Binding element. It should be defined in the ascending order in the configuration file, if there are different assembly bindings for different .Net framework versions then the lower version assembly binding should be specified before others.

### Specify Location of New Assembly

We can specify the location from where the runtime will load the new assemblies using the `<probing>` element inside the `<assemblyBinding>` element like below

```xml
<configuration>
  <runtime>
   <assemblyBinding xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v1">
    <probing privatePath="bin"/>
    </assemblyBinding>
  </runtime>
</configuration>
```

We can specify multiple directories in the privatePath, each separated by a terminator e.g. `bin;bin2\subbin;bin3`. Note that we can only specify the sub-directories of our application base path in the privatePath attribute.
