---
date: 2018-06-03
title: "C# Constructors Refresher"
template: post
slug: csharp-constructors-refresher
categories:
  - C#
tags:
  - c#
  - .net
---

Sometimes, the most basic concepts of object oriented programming are easily overlooked. Take static and private constructors for instance, questions like when a static constructor is useful? why even have a private constructor? are all over the web. So I decided to dig a bit deeper in to C# constructors and to share it with you guys as well along the way.

### Constructor

A method inside a class or a struct that has the same name as of class or struct and no return type. It can however have arguments of choice and can be classified on the basis of who, how and when it can be called.

### Instance constructor

This constructor must be public and is called whenever a new instance of a class is created. It can have arguments which are typically used to initialize class fields and properties to default values. Without a pubic constructor, instance of a class cannot be created from outside the scope of the same class. So if you do not want clients to create instances of your class, make sure that any constructor of the class is not public. Below is a simple example of instance constructor.

```csharp
public class Person
{
  public string Name { get; set; }
  public int Age { get; set; }

  public Person() { }

  public Person(string name, int age)
  {
    Name = name;
    Age = age;
  }
}
```

### Private Constructor

A private constructor is created when there is private or no access modifier is specified with the constructor. Similar to an instance constructor, it can take arguments and can be defined more than once. Its a special type of instance constructor as it can be accessed through nested classed only and not by the client classes. If a class only has a private constructor, it cannot be initiated from client code. It is generally used in classes that contain static members only.

In the following example, User can only be created internally. External clients can access the User class but they cannot create new instance of User class without calling the CreateUser method.

```csharp
public class User
{
  public string Id { get; }
  public string Name { get; }
  public int Age { get; }

  private User(string name, int age)
  {
    Id = Guid.NewGuid().ToString();
    Name = name;
    Age = age;
  }

  public User CreateUser()
  {
    return new User("Foo", 25);
  }
}
```

Below example specifies a private constructor to avoid automatic creation of C# constructor.

```csharp
public class Counter
{
  private Counter() { }
  public static int currentCount;
  public static int IncrementCount()
  {
    return ++currentCount;
  }
}
```

### Static Constructor

A static parameter less constructor which is called automatically whenever any static member of class is referenced or when instance of class is created. Static constructor is only called once during lifetime of application. It does not take any access modifiers and arguments, that means it can only be at most one per class.

It is mostly used to initialize static members of the class or to perform any action that must be performed before initialization of the class at run time.

Key points about static constructs taken from Microsoft docs:

1. A static constructor does not take access modifiers or have parameters.
1. A static constructor is called automatically to initialize the class before the first instance is created or any static members are referenced.
1. A static constructor cannot be called directly.
1. The user has no control on when the static constructor is executed in the program.
1. A typical use of static constructors is when the class is using a log file and the constructor is used to write entries to this file.
1. Static constructors are also useful when creating wrapper classes for un-managed code, when the constructor can call the LoadLibrary method.
1. If a static constructor throws an exception, the runtime will not invoke it a second time, and the type will remain uninitialized for the lifetime of the application domain in which your program is running.

In the following example, opening time of mall is static and same for all shops and is initialized whenever the first mall shop was opened.

```csharp
public class MallShop
{
  static readonly string mallName;
  static readonly DateTime mallOpenTime;

  int shopNumber;

  static MallShop()
  {
    mallName = "FooBar";
    mallOpenTime = DateTime.Now;
  }

  public MallShop(int shopNumber)
  {
    this.shopNumber = shopNumber;
  }

  public void OpenShop()
  {
    var delay = mallOpenTime - DateTime.Now;
    Console.WriteLine($"Shop {shopNumber} opened after {delay.TotalSeconds} seconds of mall opening");
  }
}
```

That’s all for now, Happy constructing :)
