---
date: 2019-10-13
title: "Challenges in Websites Development & Deployment"
template: post
slug: challenges-in-websites-development-and-deployment
categories:
  - Web
tags:
  - website
  - development
  - bundling
  - minification
  - deployment
---

While writing web applications, it is important to have your development setup streamlined to fulfill the development and deployment aspects of the application. For example, you would want to run a development server that hosts the application locally and utilize some tool that will compile and execute the app in browser, whenever you change anything in the code. Also, you might want to support latest Javascript language features on all browsers or may be simply want to use Node.js style code features in the browser such as the use of `require` and `import` keywords. For deployment, you might also want to minify and bundle all of your files.

Think of a scenario where you have a web app or website that contains quite a few JS files, CSS files, HTML files and you are also using third party libraries that also come with their own set of these files. There are quite a few challenges associated with development and deployment of such apps.

### Challenge # 1: Bundling

To call functions from other JS files or simply to use styles in an HTML file, you need to have all these files linked. Typically this is done by adding a script tag for JS and link tag for CSS files in the HTML target file. This gets really messy as the number of files grow and because browsers send individual web requests to fetch these resources which is both not efficient and not scalable. What we need is a tool, that would bundle or merge all common files in a single file so that minimal files are deployed to the browser that will eventually have fewer web requests. Normally files of same type are bundled together e.g., foo.bundle.js, bar.bundle.css , and so on.

### Challenge # 2: Minification

The code that we write, contains a lot of new lines, tabs and, spaces mainly for readability as it would become really difficult to read code without any spaces. But computers don’t need those spaces as every block of code is already separated by terminator or brackets. Here comes the concept of minification, where such unwanted characters are removed from the files in order to reduce file size and improve performance.

### Challenge # 3: Compilation

If you are using a pre-processor such as SASS, SCSS, LESS for the CSS files then we also need to compile those files before they can be served. Also, JS files need to be compiled if we need to convert language features from one ECMA version to other. Babel is a compiler for JS that is commonly used for this purpose. These compilations of course, need to be performed before deployment to the browser.

### Challenge # 4: Supporting multiple browsers

This is by far the most pressing challenge, as browsers are built on different engines that do not support all the latest web technology features at all times. For example, latest Javascript ES6 syntax and features such as promises and async are not supported in Internet Explorer 11 and below. A very useful site to check which features are supported is https://caniuse.com. To fill this gap, there are Transpilers (source to source compilers) that takes the code with latest syntax and features and emit compatible code for other browsers. Features are usually filled in by using polyfills , which enable a functionality by filling in the gaps in the environment. There are several polyfills provided by Babel as well.

### Challenge # 5: Task Execution

In a development environment, above challenges need to be dealt with on every change in the source code. We cannot even think of manually doing above tasks on each code update. What we need is a tool that would automate these mundane tasks so that developers only have to write them once and they run on every change.

### Tools to overcome challenges

Above challenges can be easily overcome using great tools built by awesome people. A few of them includes Gulp, Grunt, Webpack, Browserify and so on. Lets see what these tools are in one sentence, as marketed.

Gulp: “gulp is a toolkit for automating painful or time-consuming tasks in your development workflow, so you can stop messing around and build something.”

Grunt: “the Javascript task runner”

Webpack: “bundles your assets” such as JS, CSS, HTML, Image files, etc.

Browserify: “browserify lets you require('modules') in the browser by bundling up all of your dependencies.”

In the upcoming articles, we will be using these tools in a real world web app and will hopefully also compare them in terms of functionality.
