---
date: 2020-05-11
title: "Virtual Server Setup"
template: post
slug: virtual-server-setup
categories:
  - Productivity
tags:
  - environment
  - linux
  - vServer
  - blog
---

_This post is a work in progress_

To get more organized and productive, I thought it would be cool to setup the following tools and features on the web.

- Personal Domain for myself
- Personalized Calendar
- Personalized task management software
- Data Accessibility from everywhere

This can be done by hosting a Linux vServer and installing open source software applications to enable above features. In Germany, Strato is one of many hosting service provider and my colleague has been using that for a while now. That was naturally an easy choice for me.

I subscribed to their following offers:

- Linux V10-8 (12.de) which costs about 5 euros per month for a 12 months subscription.
- Additional 1.5 euros/month for custom domains. Which will be https://saadsaifse.com

### Setting up Strato

Soon after subscribing, a (Kundennummber) customer number is received, which is used to login to their portal to manage your server. The initial server data comes with Ubuntu Linux pre-installed. In my case, it was Ubuntu 18.04 LTS 64bit. I got 4 virtual CPU cores, 8GB of RAM, and 100GB storage space. The password for `root` username is provided to access the server via `ssh` or something similar.

### After `ssh`

At this point, we have our account with Strato ready, a virtual server is given to us and we can access it. We can `ssh` into the server by using the server's hostname and `root` account. By this time, we can setup the server as per our likings.

The first step is to create a new user account under my name.

- Check for all users on Linux using `cat /etc/passwd` command.
- Create a new user by running `sudo useradd username`.
- Set the password of the new account by executing `sudo passwd username` and entering the password twice.
- Now `ssh` into your newly created user account. If it complains about the home directory not created. You can manually create the home directory by using `sudo mkdir /home/username` and assign permissions `chown username:username /home/username`.
- By default, the default terminal of the new user is `/bin/sh` but we can easily change that to `bash` by using `usermod --shell /bin/bash username` from the `root` account.
