---
date: 2020-07-18
title: "Setting Up NextCloud"
template: post
slug: setting-up-nextcloud
categories:
  - Productivity
tags:
  - environment
  - linux
  - vServer
  - blog
---

Lately, I have bee trying to setup a virtual Linux server for myself. I have wrote the details about that in my other post [here](../virtual-server-setup).

This post is about setting up personal cloud. I have chosen NextCloud for that purpose because it simply has all the features that I want such as Calendar, File Management among others.

### Installing On Linux

NextCloud comes as Snap package and installing that is super easy. Just run the following if you are using Ubuntu 16.04 LTS or later.

```bash
$ sudo snap install nextcloud
```

### Configuring With NGINX

Configuring NextCloud with NGINX was a little tricky. By default NGINX is running the default HTTP virtual server on port 80. And since NextCloud also uses the default port 80 for HTTP and 443 for HTTPS, we need to change the ports and then point a new NGINX virtual server to the new location. To change the ports of NextCloud run

```bash
$ sudo snap set nextcloud ports.http=81 ports.https=444
```

Now, we need to instruct NGINX for a virtual server whenever a request to a particular domain name arrives. There is a nice guide [here](https://github.com/nextcloud/nextcloud-snap/wiki/Putting-the-snap-behind-a-reverse-proxy#nginx) that I followed to make that happen. In short, we added the following virtual server in NGINX config file. This can also be a separate file, linked to the main config file but that does not really matter.

```bash
server {
        listen 80;
        # If you want to also support ipv6
        listen [::]:80;

        server_name <domain name>;

        location / {
                proxy_pass_header   Server;
                proxy_set_header    Host $host;
                proxy_set_header    X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
                proxy_set_header    X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
                proxy_set_header    X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
                proxy_pass          http://127.0.0.1:81;
        }
}
```

To enable HTTPS, add create a new file at `/etc/nginx/tcpconf.d/nextcloud`, include it in the main config file `include /etc/nginx/tcpconf.d/*;` with the following content

```bash
stream {
        server {
                listen 443;
                listen [::]:443;
                proxy_pass 127.0.0.1:444;
        }
}
```

Finally, make sure HTTPS is enabled using Let's Encrypt. To enable it, run `sudo nextcloud.enable-https lets-encrypt` and we are good to go.

By following this method, I can use HTTPS, but it redirects the URL with added port number `444`. I have opened an issue already on their repository [here](https://github.com/nextcloud/nextcloud-snap/issues/1411). I will update this article as I find a fix for that. But hey, NextCloud is running on HTTPS and can simply be used as is as well. Cheers!
